


Network Working Group                                       E. Hsia, Ed.
Request for Comments: 1                   JHU Network Security Fall 2017
Category: Standards Track                                   October 2017


                 Lab 2 Playground Request For Comments

Abstract

   PEEP (Players Enjoy Eavesdropping Protocol) is a "middleware"
   protocol intended to provide reliable transmission between two
   communicating applications.  The protocol is composed of three
   process: three-way handshake, data transmission and four-way
   termination.  This document describes the functions to be performed
   by the PEEP layer and the program that implements it.

Status of this Memo

   This document specifies a Playgrounds standards track protocol for
   the Playground Experiment, and requests discussion and suggestions
   for improvements.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 SETH JAMES NIELSON.  All rights reserved.

   This document is used solely for educational purposes.  Any citations
   within this document are also for educational purposes and also for
   technical reference.  If any of these cited elements are protected
   under copyright, their inclusion here falls under Fair Use
   provisions.




















Hsia                         Standards Track                    [Page 1]

RFC 1                           Lab2PRFC                    October 2017


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Session Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Session Establishment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  Session Termination  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Packet Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  PEEP Packet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.1.1.  SYN Packet, Type 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.1.2.  SYN-ACK Packet, Type 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.1.3.  ACK Packet, Type 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.1.4.  RIP Packet, Type 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.1.5.  RIP-ACK Packet, Type 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.1.6.  DATA Packet, Type 5  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Protocol Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Client Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2.  Server Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.3.  Data Transmission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.3.1.  Computational Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.4.  Error Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 12



























Hsia                         Standards Track                    [Page 2]

RFC 1                           Lab2PRFC                    October 2017


1.  Introduction

   The purpose of lab 2 is to design and implement a TCP-like transport
   layer to be used by application-layer protocols.  This layer connects
   to the Passthrough layer with the PLAYGROUND framework, designed by
   Dr. Seth James Nielson, to give students an environment to learn
   about internet security attacks and defenses on a much smaller scale.
   The application layer is the higher layer above the Passthrough.

   In particular, the transport layer in lab 2, dubbed PEEP (Players
   Enjoy Eavesdropping Protocol) consists of the following parts: a
   3-way handshake to establish connection between a server side
   application and a client side application, data transmission between
   protocols, and a 4-way termination.  Although there were multiple
   teams each working on an implementation on such a layer, the class as
   a whole was required to use the same general design so that every
   layer would operate on the same PLAYGROUND framework.  To accomplish
   this, each team elected one member to participate in a PETF
   (Playground Engineering Task Force) to formulate a communal design
   for the layer, including the expectations of the 3-way handshake,
   data transmission, and 4-way termination, along with clear acceptance
   criteria of a PEEP packet and a state machine for the protocols.
   This PRFC will go into more depth of each of these aspects that the
   PETF agreed on as well as error handling.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Session Life

   Just like in TCP, the layer MUST create a sessions in order to
   account for multiple client protocols connecting to the same server
   protocol, and to account for the server protocol not terminating
   properly when a client finishes sending information.  Even if
   different ports are used, the old protocol will still exist in
   memory.  So we create a session to connect the client and server
   protocols, and in each session there MUST be session establishment
   and session termination.  Both session establishment and termination
   MUST require client and server protocols sending different types of
   PEEP packets back and forth.  Each of these packets will be discussed
   in further detail later in this document.






Hsia                         Standards Track                    [Page 3]

RFC 1                           Lab2PRFC                    October 2017


2.1.  Session Establishment

   Session establishment MUST use a 3-way handshake involving three
   different types of PEEP packets.  The client first sends a SYN packet
   to the server that the server validates, then the server replies with
   a SYN-ACK packet back to the client.  Finally, the client sends an
   ACK packet to start the connection with the server.

   The 3-way handshake is designed for several reasons, and each step
   has a specific purpose to fulfill those reasons.

   The first step, when the client sends the initial SYN packet to the
   server, occurs because the client always requests data from the
   server first.  This step is designed to account for the possibility
   of many clients requesting information from the server at the same
   time.  This reason is why a SYN packet is used, as each SYN packet
   carries a random number, "seq", identifier.

   The next step occurs when the server sends a SYN-ACK packet back to
   the client.  The server validates the client as a unique client, and
   then the server grants the connection.  Here, each SYN-ACK packet
   carries a different "seq" random number, and also carries an "ack"
   integer, where "ack" MUST equal the "seq" from the client plus 1.

   In the final step, the client responds with just an ACK packet with
   both a "seq" and an "ack", sending a confirmation message to the
   server.  The "seq" integer here is the same as the one from the SYN-
   ACK packet received from the server, and the "ack" integer is equal
   to the "ack" from the SYN-ACK packet plus 1.  Upon the server
   receiving this packet, the layer would call the higherProtocol's
   connection_made() function, and data transmission can commence.

2.2.  Session Termination

   Session termination, on the other hand, MUST consist of a 4-way
   termination.  After sending all the data packets, the client sends a
   RIP packet to the server, followed by the server replying with a RIP-
   ACK packet.  At this time, the server also MUST send any remaining
   data packets to the client, initiating and completing all final data
   transmission.  After the server replies with the rest of the packets,
   the server then sends a RIP packet of its own to the client, and the
   client replies with a RIP-ACK packet to close the session.

   Each step of the termination can be broken down further.  The first
   phase is when the client sends the RIP packet to the server.  It is
   the product of the client finishing sending all of its data, and it
   communicating to the server that the connection can close.




Hsia                         Standards Track                    [Page 4]

RFC 1                           Lab2PRFC                    October 2017


   The next step, when the server sends the RIP-ACK packet back to the
   client, communicates to the client that the server has received that
   message that client protocol has finished.  In order to complete the
   connection on the server side, however, the server MUST deliver to
   the client the rest of the data that the client has requested.  Once
   the server has received the corresponding ACK packets from the client
   that confirm that the client received the data, the termination can
   proceed to the next step.

   The third step in the termination occurs when the server sends a RIP
   packet to the client.  Just like with the client sending a RIP
   packet, the server is simply sending a message to the client
   communicating that it has finished sending data back and can close
   now.

   The last step, the client replying with a RIP-ACK, serves as
   confirmation from the client that it has received the message that
   the server can close.  As a result, both protocols close, and the
   session terminates.


3.  Packet Description

   In the previous section, the use of PEEP packets was brought up, but
   with little depth.  In this section, we will more clearly describe
   the packet used in the PEEP layer.

3.1.  PEEP Packet

   The PEEP packet is a general packet class designed to send the
   messages between the server and client.  This does not include
   sending the actual data and information back and forth from server
   and client, as depending on the requests, the data will change.
   Rather, the PEEP packet is made for consistency so that the server
   and client know when to send information back and forth, and when to
   establish a connection or when to terminate one.

   The PEEP packet is a descendent of the PacketType class from
   Playground, and as such the fields inherit the types that Playground
   defines: UINT, INT, STRING, BOOL, BUFFER, and ComplexFieldType.
   Here, BUFFER and variations of UINT, were used in the field types.

   To be considered a PEEP packet, the packet MUST have five fields:
   "Type" of type UINT8, optional field "SequenceNumber" of UINT32
   (often abbreviated seq), "Checksum" of type UINT16, optional field
   "Acknowledgement" of type UINT32, and optional field "Data" of type
   BUFFER.  All UINTS are unsigned integers, and BUFFER allows the data
   to be transmitted in bytes to the packets in order.



Hsia                         Standards Track                    [Page 5]

RFC 1                           Lab2PRFC                    October 2017


   The first field deals with the type of the packet.  There are six
   types to any valid PEEP packet.  There are SYN, SYN-ACK, ACK, RIP,
   RIP-ACK, and DATA.  Depending on the packet type, the rest of the
   fields will differ in value to distinguish.  Note that checksum will
   be talked about in more depth later.

3.1.1.  SYN Packet, Type 0

   As mentioned previously, a SYN packet is used to initiate the 3-way
   handshake.  This packet is sent by the client to the server.  Here,
   the sequence number is generated randomly, and there are no
   acknowledgement or data fields in this packet.

3.1.2.  SYN-ACK Packet, Type 1

   The SYN-ACK packet is used in response to the client's SYN packet.
   This packet is sent by the server.  Again, there is no data field
   here, but there are both sequence numbers and ackownledgement
   numbers.  The sequence number is randomly generated, and the
   acknowledgement number inherits the old sequence number and adds 1.

3.1.3.  ACK Packet, Type 2

   An ACK packet is used in two instances, the end of handshake and
   during any and all data transmission, including clearing the buffer
   at the end.  An ACK packet has no data field, but has a sequence
   number and acknowledgement number.  Here seq is equal to the
   acknowledgement number of the last packet received, and the
   acknowledgement number is the sequence number of the last packet
   received plus 1 if it is concluding handshake or plus the length of
   the data if during data transmission.

   An ACK packet must be sent for every DATA packet received, but piggy-
   backing is NOT required in handling this.

3.1.4.  RIP Packet, Type 3

   A RIP packet is sent twice during session termination, once by the
   client and once by the server.  There are no data or acknoweldgement
   fields.  The sequence number is equal to the last data packet's
   sequence number plus data length.

3.1.5.  RIP-ACK Packet, Type 4

   A RIP-ACK packet is sent twice as well during termination, by client
   and server.  There are no sequence number or data fields.  The
   acknowledgement number is equal to the received RIP packet's sequence
   number plus 1.



Hsia                         Standards Track                    [Page 6]

RFC 1                           Lab2PRFC                    October 2017


3.1.6.  DATA Packet, Type 5

   The DATA packet is sent during data transmission by both client and
   server.  There is no acknowledgement number, and it inherits the
   sequence number from the packet the protocol just received.  The data
   field consists of what the protocol wants to send to the other, and
   this data must be chunked during transmission and then that chunking
   is reversed upon receiving.

   For every DATA packet sent, there must be an ACK packet from the
   receiving protocol verifying that the data was received.


4.  Protocol Specification

   Just like in any other network interactions, there MUST be a client
   protocol and a server protocol.  This section will describe the state
   machine of the client protocol, the state machine of the server
   protocol, and the data transmission between the two.

4.1.  Client Machine

   At state 0, the client is in the Initial SYN State.  In this state,
   the client prepares the checksum for the packet header fields.  The
   client then sends the resulting SYN packet to the server to initiate
   connection.

   In state 1, the client is in the SYN-ACK State.  This state exists
   when the client is awaiting the SYN-ACK packet response from the
   server.  The client MUST have a timeout here to handle the case of
   the server taking too long to generate a response, which would result
   from either the initial SYN packet being invalid or the server
   crashing.  If a packet is not received after the timeout, the program
   terminates.  If the packet is received compute the checksum.  If the
   checksum is incorrect, ignore the packet.  Otherwise, proceed to
   transmission.

   In the Transmission State, state 2, the client can now send data
   packets.  When packets are received in this state, the client replies
   to the server with ACK packets.  While the client is in this state,
   if it receives a data packet from the server and the checksum is
   incorrect, the client can send back ACK packets alerting the server
   to retransmit the packet.  Otherwise, the ACK packet sends a message
   of verification that it was received.

   In state 3, the RIP Sent State, the client sends a RIP packet to
   alert the server that it has sent all data and can close.




Hsia                         Standards Track                    [Page 7]

RFC 1                           Lab2PRFC                    October 2017


   In state 4, RIP_ACK Receive State, the client receives the RIP-ACK
   packet from the server and waits for the server to clear the buffer.
   Once the client receives the RIP packet from the server, the client
   proceeds to the Close State.

   In state 5, the client is in the Close State, and the client replies
   to the server with a RIP-ACK packet to send confirmation that it
   received the RIP packet.

   The client also has an Error State, in which it enters when any
   errors occur in any other state.  The client either loses connection
   unexpectedly or receives an unexpected type of packet at the current
   state.

4.2.  Server Machine

   At state 0, the server is in the SYN-ACK State, where it awaits the
   SYN packet from the client protocol.  When the SYN packet is
   received, the server computes its checksum and if it is correct, it
   sends the SYN-ACK packet back to the client.  In this state, the
   server MUST have a timeout such that if the server does not receive
   the SYN packet within that timeout period, the program ends and the
   server clears its buffer.

   In state 1, the server is now in the SYN state.  In this state, the
   server awaits the ACK packet from the client.  Again, the server MUST
   have a timeout implemented here so that after a certain time, if the
   packet is not received, the handshake ends and the buffer is cleared.
   If the packet is received, and the checksum is correct, the server
   moves to transmission.

   In the Transmission State, state 2, the server can now send data
   packets to the client, sending ACK packets back to the client when
   packets are received.  If the checksum of any received packet is
   incorrect, the server can alert the client in the ACK packet to
   retransmit, but otherwise the ACK packet replies with confirmation.

   In state 3, the Clear Buffer State, the server receives the RIP
   packet from the client and replies to the client with a RIP-ACK
   packet for confirmation.  Then the server proceeds to clear the
   buffer.  It sends any leftover data to the client, receiving ACK
   packets from the client for confirmation.

   In state 4, the RIP Sent State, the server sends a RIP packet to the
   client after it finishes clearing the buffer.  This packet lets the
   client know that the server has finished clearing the buffer and is
   ready to close.




Hsia                         Standards Track                    [Page 8]

RFC 1                           Lab2PRFC                    October 2017


   In state 5, the server is in the Close State, and the server receives
   the RIP-ACK packet from the client, letting it know that both
   protocols can close.

   The server also has an Error State, in which it enters when any
   errors occur in any other state.  The server either loses connection
   unexpectedly or receives an unexpected type of packet at the current
   state

4.3.  Data Transmission

   While both the client and server are in their Transmission States,
   both can send and receive data packets.

   The process for receiving data packets is designed as follows.  Each
   protocol MUST receive the data packet bytes and, after the last
   packet is received, reply with an ACK packet for confirmation.  This
   way, the ACK also guarantees that the packets are received in order,
   and all the packets are received.  The receiving protocol must also
   validate the packets by computing and verifying their Checksums.  The
   process for computing Checksum will be discussed in further detail in
   a later section.

   The process for sending data packets is different.  Both the client
   and server MUST have a "window" to control data packets.  What does
   this mean?  Assume the window size is 5.  Then the client/server
   could send 5 data packets without receiving ACK packets.  And then
   even if they have more data packets, they will have to wait for ACK
   packets.  If they receive ACK packets for some of the data packets,
   the window could move forward.  But if they don't receive any ACK
   packets within a timeout, they MUST send those packets again.  The
   data MUST also be chunked during sending, but only the data buffer,
   not the entire packet.

   While these processes are defined separately, obviously both will be
   interacting with each other concurrently.  When one protocol sends
   data, the other is receiving it, so both the client and server MUST
   work together during data transmission.

4.3.1.  Computational Algorithms

   Up to this point, Checksum has been discussed a lot but not in depth.
   This section will break down Checksum in more detail.

   Checksum calculation is the main computational algorithm used by the
   PEEP layer.  This checksum calculation is used to verify that the
   packets received are correct and in the right order, as it verifies
   the value with the checksum of the packet when it was initialized.



Hsia                         Standards Track                    [Page 9]

RFC 1                           Lab2PRFC                    October 2017


   The checksum calculation stores the original checksum of the packet
   and resets the checksum of the packet to zero.  Then the packet is
   serialized into bytes and the layer computes the Adler32 of those
   bytes, truncated to 16 bits.  Then, the checksum of the packet is set
   back to the original checksum, and the Adler32 computation of the
   bytes is returned.  As long as the Adler32 computation of the
   serialized received packet matches the checksum of the expected
   packet, then the packet is verified.  Otherwise, the protocol asks
   for a retransmission of the data.

   The checksum of a packet can also be updated by calling the same
   calculation.

4.4.  Error Handling

   For a successful PEEP layer, there MUST exist two types of error
   handling in both the client and server whenever packets are received.
   The first type is a timeout whenever either protocol is awaiting a
   response, and the second is the checksum to ensure the right packets
   are received.

   Both sides MUST have a timeout whenever a response is expected for
   multiple reasons.  The first is if there is an error on the other
   end.  So if the client is waiting for a server response, and the
   server crashes or takes too long because it encounters issues with
   creating the new packets to send, then the client can terminate the
   connection because the response is taking too long.  Another reason
   is if there is something blocking the packet in another layer.  At
   that point, the packet would never arrive to the client, and so the
   connection would be terminated after timeout.

   Both sides MUST also validate the Checksum of each packet to ensure
   it is the right packet that the protocol is receiving.  The packet
   could either have been generated incorrectly by the other side or
   could have been altered in another layer.  So the Checksum is used to
   match the fields of the PEEP packet to ensure that it is the one that
   the protocol was expecting.  If the Checksum is incorrect, the
   protocol asks for a retransmission of the packet.


5.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, DOI 10.17487/
              RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.





Hsia                         Standards Track                   [Page 10]

RFC 1                           Lab2PRFC                    October 2017


Author's Address

   Evan Hsia (editor)
   JHU Network Security Fall 2017
   Johns Hopkins University 122 Malone Hall/3400 North Charles St.
   Baltimore, MD  21218
   USA

   Phone: +1 860-519-4112
   Email: ehsia1@jhu.edu









































Hsia                         Standards Track                   [Page 11]

RFC 1                           Lab2PRFC                    October 2017


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) Seth James Nielson (2017).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the PLAYGROUND experiment or
   other associated organizations, except by explicit permission.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by SETH JAMES NIELSON or his successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and SETH JAMES NIELSON and associated academic
   institutions DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The PLAYGROUND framework and student submissions for PLAYGROUND are
   intended to be free of any intellectual property conflicts.  All
   submitting parties, especially students, are not allowed to submit
   source code, specifications, or other components that are known to be
   protected by copyright, patents, or other IP mechanisms.  Students
   submitting creative content grant shared rights and ownership of
   their content to the PLAYGROUND project.  Specifically, any
   submission can be used in future educational settings including
   subsequent PLAYGROUND experiments.

   Any interested party is invited to bring to the experiment director's
   attention any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other
   proprietary rights which may cover technology that may be currently
   in use without permission.

   It should be noted that these statements have not been reviewed by
   legal counsel.  Moreover, the academic institutions at which
   PLAYGROUND experiments take place may have additional or even
   conflicting copyright and intellectual property rules.  Accordingly,
   concerned parties may need to contact their own lawyer and/or
   resources at their institution to understand the rights and



Hsia                         Standards Track                   [Page 12]

RFC 1                           Lab2PRFC                    October 2017


   limitations associated with code donated to a PLAYGROUND experiment.


















































Hsia                         Standards Track                   [Page 13]

